# 14. The future
Many advanced controls are now commercialized and the
prices are decreasing. Also, the cost for on-line sensors has
been reduced significantly. This means that the critical size of
a plant for a good payback of advanced control decreases and
the potential market of advanced control is growing. Now we
face the challenge to develop methods for a clear cost-benefit
analysis of ICA in both water and wastewater systems. This
analysis also has to include the effect of automation on
design. How do we quantify risks? How to develop more
specific definitions of safety factors? How do we prepare for
disturbances with a flexible design? How do we design in
a modular fashion - to adapt for increasing load and
increasing demands for the future - and still have control and
automation in mind all the time?

The decision-making is another key issue. Water and
wastewater treatment plants are not isolated, but parts of
larger urban water systems. This means that the planning and
implementation of ICA has to be system-wide and pursued
both vertically and horizontally. System-wide also includes
water supply. Smart water grids are getting attention and the
1st International Workshop on Smart Water Grids was held in
Korea in March 2011. A Smart Water Grid delivers water from
suppliers to consumers using a wide spectrum of sensors,
digital communication, computer control and actuators. The
ultimate purpose of a smart water grid is to minimize water
consumption, to ensure water quality, and to maintain and
operate the system as efficiently as possible and to keep the
system consistently operating. The smart grid should automatically
detect, analyze and respond to malfunctions and
should optimize asset use (Olsson, 2011b). Why is it needed? A
smart water grid should be adapted to include various sources
of the water, both from conventional sources, surface water
and ground water, and from reused water of water coming
from new processes like desalination. The use of the water
should be related to the quality of water delivered. All of this
has to be monitored and controlled in real time.

The fact that the technical systems are integrated has to be
reflected in the organisation, so that integrated operation
becomes possible, also at the managerial level. The river
associations in Germany and the water authorities in the UK
have shown that such organisational integration can be both
powerful and successful.

Decentralized systems have become increasingly in
demand since they can offer wastewater source separation,
flexibility, water and nutrient reuse in a more economically
feasible way than many centralized systems. In order to be
acceptable a small wastewater treatment plant has to provide
a sufficiently good effluent quality for a specific use. Thus, it
has to offer advanced wastewater treatment, and at the same
time be cost and energy efficient and easy to operate. Automation
will become a crucial part of any decentralized plant,
since the plant has to work autonomously. The potential of
ICA in decentralized operation is considered in Olsson (2011c).

Sensor data and other data in treatment and transport
systems have increased almost exponentially over the last
decades. This does not necessarily mean that the information
has increased as much. With more sensors available and
stricter effluent quality requirements the operator will need
ever improving support from the control systems. This leads
to higher demands on reliable fault analysis, data screening,
information condensation and operator guidance. The quality
of data has to be guaranteed at all times. Also the behaviour or
the control algorithms needs to be supervised. What to do if
the measurement looks unreasonable or is missing? How to
make sure that the actuator has worked as intended? All this
leads to the need for “safety nets” and software robustness for
the controller implementation and control algorithms that do
not run amuck because of failing components.

Today modularisation becomes more and more common.
This requires good interfaces between various software
modules. Considering that the life spans of plant hardware,
computer hardware, instrumentation, electronics, software
and control structures are all quite different, it has to be
possible to make exchanges of modules in the system without
risking that other modules will not function any more. This
puts a lot of pressure not only on the control system manufacturers.
The users have to be competent customers.

We are well aware that urban water systems are large in
many aspects, not the least in terms of geography. This makes
networking even more interesting to better integrate the
various operations, in particular when decentralized systems
are applied. In Bernard et al. (2005), mentioned in 8.4, the
Internet was used to supervise and control anaerobic digesters
of winery wastes. This was part of the EU TELEMAC project. In
the project experts located at one place could supervise
a number of digesters via the Internet. The potential of Internet
is enormous, not only to read data from various parts of the
system. Via the net control modules, written somewhere else,
can be tested in a real plant before they are permanently
installed in the plant control system. The net can also be more
utilised to bring in experts in special situations, when it is
needed. The integrated plant control may be a vision today, but
will probablybeamain issue in the continuedICAdevelopment.

The water and energy nexus has become apparent in the
last few years (Olsson, 2011a). Integrated planning and operation
as well as plant-wide control will use ICA methodology
to coordinate the systems for better efficiency and robustness
to disturbances. This is part of the urgent needs caused by the
tremendous urban development and the global warming. ICA
will have a role to play and has to bring together several
specialists to deal with the important challenges. Communicating
via dynamical models and simulators is one important
possibility.

The challenge of automation is to comprehend the system
aspects from a unit process perspective and to understand the
process aspects from a system perspective. One important
consequence is that process specialists have to be able to
appreciate the implications of ICA. Likewise computer and
control engineers have to understand the process controllability
and its constraints. The multi-disciplinary character of
water operations is a great challenge that ought to inspire our
future research and development.
