# 11. Plant-wide control
We have seen several times that it is often not sufficient to
control each unit process in isolation. The decomposition of
complex systems is a convenient way of designing and operating
control systems. But eventually we must step back and
take a helicopter view of the whole plant, or even a larger
system. We may talk about plant-wide, system-wide or integrated
control when not only the various unit processes of
a wastewater treatment plant but also the sewer and sometimes
the receiving water are included. Whatever size of the
system we have to define its boundaries, so that we can define
external and internal events. Depending on the system size
we will have different degrees of freedom and each system
definition will determine what we can manipulate.
It was recognized already at the first ICA conference (see
2.1) and later documented in Beck (1976) that a plant-wide
perspective has to be applied in order to achieve the highest
possible efficiency in the operation. The operation of the
primary settler will influence the treatment both in the activated
sludge unit and the anaerobic treatment of the sludge.
Chemical precipitation can be performed by dosing before or
after the reactors or in the reactor itself. The many recycles
make the complex couplings obvious, such as the return
sludge, nitrate recycle or the recycling of the supernatant from
the anaerobic digester to the influent of the wastewater
treatment. The interactions demand that we look at the global
effects of the chosen disturbance rejection strategies, with
a particular emphasis on recycle streams (Olsson and Newell,
1999).

The sequential relationship between the sewer, the
wastewater treatment plant and the receiving water is
obvious. For the sewer operation the goal is to minimise the
amount of combined sewer overflow (CSO) (Brueck et al.,
1981; Schilling, 1989). The aim of the control of the WWTP
is to satisfy the effluent requirements while minimizing the
operational costs. During storm conditions these goals may
be difficult to reach. It is obvious that the control of a sewer
system isolated from the WWTP operation will lead to suboptimal
solutions. If the goal of the sewer operation is to
minimise the CSO, then the WWTP may soon be overloaded.
We made some experiments with primary pumping control
in the 1980s at the Ka¨ppala wastewater treatment plants
outside Stockholm. The purpose was to avoid sudden
hydraulic disturbances by equalizing the influent flow rate as
much as possible. However, we soon realized that what we
had gained in the flow equalization was lost in the first flush
disturbances, once the flow had to be increased. Another
aspect of the plant-wide approach is to calculate where to
bring the organic material: to minimize sludge transportation,
to produce biogas, to make sure that denitrification
is working.

The control of any complex system needs a structure. This
means that the overall goal of the control and operation has to
be defined rather than just develop control loops for each
individual unit process. In the control science a lot of research
efforts have been made to develop methods for plant-wide
control (Larsson and Skogestad, 2000). The controlled and
manipulated variables (control handles) have to be identified.
The possible (and desired) measurements should be found.
Then the structure of interconnecting measurements, setpoints
and manipulated variables has to be selected. Finally
the control algorithms (PID, predictive controllers etc.) have to
be chosen. As remarked by Stephanopoulos and Ng (2000) the
plant-wide control problem possesses certain characteristics
that are not encountered in the design of control systems for
unit processes:

* The variables to be controlled by a plant-wide control
system are not as clearly or as easily defined as for single
units;
* Local control actions in one unit may have long-range
effects throughout the plant. We have seen examples in 8.3;
* The plant-wide control problem is significantly more
complex than that for the individual units.

The central issue to be resolved in plant-wide control is the
translation of implicit plant-wide operating objectives to sets
of feedback-controlled variables of individual control loops.
The supervisory control, called STAR(Superiour Tuning and
Reporting), was presented for an international audience in
1993 (Lynggaard-Jensen and Nielsen, 1993) and was commercialized
by Kru¨ ger AS, Denmark. The system automatically
calculates the setpoints for the individual control loops of the
system. If the supervisory control system is unable to calculate
a new setpoint, then the setpoints are kept constant by
the low-level control system. There are five supervisory
control modules implemented in the system:

* Phase control: The phase control determines the switching
between the Biodenitrophases as a function of ammonia
and nitrate levels in the biological reactors. The phase
control is coupled to the dissolved oxygen setpoint control.
* Dissolved oxygen setpoint: This control and the phase control
serve to match the relative aerated nitrifying and the nonaerated
denitrifying times to the current load of the plant.
The dissolved oxygen setpoint during the aerated phase is
adjusted according to the ammonia concentration level. The
setpoint control is also used to save some carbon for the use
in the anoxic reaction and for the biological P removal.
* Pure oxygen addition: During extreme loads the aeration may
not be sufficient and pure oxygen can be added. The control
decision is based on measurements of ammonia, dissolved
oxygen and estimates of the oxygen uptake rate.
* Chemical dosage: The metal dosing is a local control loop
based on the phosphate and flow rate measurements.
* Return sludge flow rate: The return sludge flow rate is strongly
coupled to its concentration. This control aims at stabilising
the suspended solids concentration in the return sludge
stream and is based on measurements of the suspended
solids and the influent flow rate.

The system has been successful to minimise the effect of
large load variations (Nielsen and O¨ nnerth, 1995). The total
effluent N has been decreased significantly. At the same time
compressor energy has been saved by using up carbon in the
denitrification and the biological P removal. Also the chemical
dosage could be significantly decreased by keeping up the
biological P removal. The results of advanced control have
been remarkable. Based on experiences during 15 years with
about 50 wastewater systems Thomsen and O¨ nnerth (2009)
reported general results of advanced control. Operational
savings are noted as reductions in power consumption for
aeration (5-25%), power consumption for internal flow such
as return sludge and internal nitrate recirculation (25-50%),
dosage of chemicals (20-100%), and dosage of external
carbon, if any (30-100%). Better control can also result in
design improvements: the aeration volume may be decreased
by 10e25% and the secondary settling volume by 25-50%.

The energy issue is another apparent reason to consider
integrated control. In Olsson and Newell (1999), Ch. 14, we
discussed the energy issue in water: “The energy issue will be
increasingly important in the future society. There is a significant
indirect environmental impact due to the use of electrical
power, heat and chemicals. Since energy production,
transmission and distribution are related to environmental
consequences, there will always be an incentive to save
energy. Naturally, when comparing various systems for
wastewater handling, the accumulated energy consumption
of the total system has to be considered. This includes
transportation of the wastewater, energy demand for treatment,
the use of heat content in the water, and gas production.
By looking at isolated subsystems from an energy point
of view it is easy to obtain false solutions, and suboptimisation
has to be carefully avoided.” The energy issue
was, and still is, a major incentive why we have to consider
plant-wide control and operation. We also wrote about the
end user aspect: “A lot of water e and warm water e is used to
keep us clean and healthy. Only a minute fraction of the heat
content of all this water is exploited, for example in heat
pumps. If the heat content could be better utilised in cold
climates in combination with the digester gas, then the
wastewater treatment plants would be energy producers
instead of consumers, for example to supply base heating in
district heating systems.” This is now a “hot” issue indicated
by conferences on Water and Energy. IWA had its first one in
2009 and many other organizations have put a lot of attention
to the topic.

All integration means some kind of compromise. If there
were no interactions, then the individual optimisation of each
subprocess would be the best strategy. In the combined sewer
and WWTP operation the individual system operations are
sometimes in conflict, so the overall goal of minimising the
load to the receiving water has to overrule the individual goals
(Bauwens et al., 1996; Rauch and Harremoe¨s, 1996a; Schu¨tze
et al., 1999). An early approach to integrated control was
published by Rauch and Harremoe¨s (1996b). An example of the
compromises between the sewer and wastewater treatment
operation is shown in Table 3. A sewer control to minimize the
sewer overflow may increase the load to the wastewater
treatment plant. This will most probably influence the plant
performance negatively. This was also addressed by Rauch
and Harremoe¨s (1999), Benedetti et al. (2009) and
Vanrolleghem et al. (2005). Since the overall objective can still
not be defined in concrete terms, the operators seem to be
cautious to embark on the idea of integrated control
approaches. In order to make the plant-wide and integrated
control come up on the agenda, we need to focus on a wider
spectrum of problem areas. This includes structuring large
control systems, organising automation structures, and
modularising large control systems. In the survey reported by
Jeppsson et al. (2002) many countries replied that integrated
control might be the main focus, but not until 2010.

Integrated control of sewer and wastewater treatment
plants was announced as one of the key topics in the ICA 2001
conference, yet there were hardly enough papers to cover
a single session. The reason for this became clear during the
conference: groundbreaking theoretical studies have been
made and further theory development is no longer considered
interesting. However, tomake the next step and to implemente
at least some part of e control in the total system in reality
proves to be a very tedious task. System-wide control is difficult
since the interactions between the various system units have to
be taken into consideration (Rauch et al., 2002). Tools to handle
various scenarios have to be developed and relevant performance
indices must be defined. However, a major obstacle
seems to havemore to do with data (assessment, management,
and analysis) and administration than with control algorithm
issues.

One distinguished plant-wide approach was presented in
the ICA conference in 2001, by Rodriguez-Roda et al. (2002).
The authors recognized that wastewater treatment plants are
clear examples of complex and multi-faceted environmental
systems. A successful plant-wide control can not be based on
a single technique. Even if control engineering, sensor technology
and computer systems are advanced the integrated
operation of wastewater systems requires more. The authors
defined three operational levels. On the low-level (the PLC
level) all sensor information is gathered and structured into
a database. Here all the unit operations are handled, either by
automatic or manual control. The next level in the hierarchy
has access to the database to infer the possible operating state
of the complete plant. At this level two knowledge-based
reasoning modules are incorporated. One of them contains
a heuristic knowledge of the process and the other uses the
experience from previous similar and particular operating
situations. The suggested strategies are sent upwards to the
third level containing dynamic simulation software used for
evaluation and prediction. From this level the setpoints of the
unit process controllers are adjusted. The plant-wide control
system had been implemented at a treatment plant (about
130,000 equivalent inhabitants) in Granolles, in the Besos river
basin of Spain. I was inspired to see this approach. My
conclusion and hope was that plant-wide control would be the
dominating theme in the ICA research and development
during the next ten years (Olsson, 2002). Unfortunately I was
too eager and optimistic. It will take much longer.

The concept of plant-wide control has many interpretations
(Olsson and Jeppsson, 2005). In some sense the information
between the various unit operations of the plant or an
infrastructure are interconnected. A plant real time computer
will play a key role to make plant-wide control possible. Many
manufacturers and plant operation people refer to “plantwide”
as the ability to communicate between the plant parts
but this is not what we mean here with plant-wide control.
The integrated computer system, however, gives the necessary
information infrastructure for such control. Integration
aims at minimizing the impact on the receiving water, while
ensuring a better resource utilisation. The system resilience is
an important factor. This includes its ability to attenuate
disturbances and reflects its sensitivity to major disturbances
or even purposeful and harmful attacks. In the integrated
approach the ultimate goal is to formulate a criterion for the
receiving water and its ecological quality while satisfying
various economic and technical constraints. There is a great
challenge to relate this performance to the plant effluent and
possible sewer overflow. We need performance measures of
the plant operation that relate effluent quality to the resources
that are needed to obtain it, such as energy, chemicals, and
other material and operating costs. Multi-criteria optimization
is one avenue and the use of life cycle assessment tools is
another. Much remains to be done, but promising research
has been done, such as the EU research project CD4WC (2005).
Models are being developed to find strategies to calculate the
maximum WWTP loading according to continuous monitoring
and prediction of the operational state. One example is
maximising the nitrification capacity in the activated sludge
process, depending on the load to the system. Some full scale
results are reported by Rosen et al. (2004b, 2006b).

Table 3 - Examples of objectives, measurements and control handles for a combined sewer-wastewater treatment system operation (from Olsson and Jeppsson, 2005).
|   |Partial aim|Measurements|Control handles|
|---|---|---|---|
|Sewer system| * Minimize upstream overflow| * Rain| * Pumping stations|
|            | * Utilize basins for most polluted water| * Levels | * Adjustable weirs|
|Wastewater treatment plant| * To treat as much wastewater as possible during and after rainfall| * Flow rates (inlet, outlet, return sludge, recycles) | * Recycle flow rates|
|            | * Reduce hydraulic load and sludge load in secondary sedimentation tanks| * Suspended solids (aeration tanks and return sludge)| * ATS control (sedimentation in aeration tanks)|
|            |                      | * Sludge blanket| * Bypass pumping|

A plant-wide control system will assume that all the
different unit processes are controlled locally. The interaction
between different parts of the plant is considered by the
computation of suitable setpoints for the local controllers. The
sewer control system will control the flow rate in the various
parts of the sewer system using the information from water
level and flow rate sensors as well as rain gauges. The
coupling between the sewer system and treatment plant
control is achieved when the plant influent flow rate can be
predicted and manipulated.

The goal of integrated control is not to build up increasingly
complex ICA systems. Quite the opposite: an ICA system
has to be in a systematic way so as to deal with the intricate
couplings of a complex process. These couplings appear
between competing biological processes, between unit
processes, between fast and slow reactions, between sewer
systems and treatment plants and between the treatment
plants and the receiving water. Integrated control is still in its
infancy. The necessary condition of having a plant-wide
computer information system is often satisfied. Now operation
and control has to take advantage of the system-wide
information and integrate the operation of one unit with
other interacting system units. I still believe that this development
will take place.
